# CISEGrant2024
Data analysis and automation to investigate changes in streamflow and groundwater well levels over the last 150 years. 

ABSTRACT
Over the last 150 years, the global average temperature has increased approximately 1.0 째C.  The atmosphere can hold 7% more water vapor per 1.0 째C warming (Trenberth, 2011).  Thus a warming atmosphere has the potential to hold more water vapor thereby increasing the risk of heavy precipitation and flooding (van Wijngaarden and Syed, 2015) .  Also with a warming atmosphere, the land surface would become drier, possibly leading to more frequent droughts (above background levels).
BACKGROUND
If such changes (more floods and droughts) have occurred in the last 150 years due to the 1.0 째C warming that has occurred, then those changes should be reflected in streamflow records and water well records.  If these changes can be observed in the data collected since 1880, then they will be indicators of future changes in streamflow and groundwater, since the atmosphere is forecast to warm another 1째C by the year 2100 (IPCC, 2022).  Streamflow and groundwater levels are the direct results of climate forcing.  For example, peak floods mainly result from intense or long-duration rainfall, depending on the size of the watershed.  Water well levels respond more slowly to precipitation changes, but falling groundwater levels are good indicators of long-term drought.  The US Geological Survey is a repository for large data sets including daily, monthly, annual, and flood peak streamflow records extending as far back as 1880 for some rivers.  Groundwater level data are kept from wells going back to the early 1900s.  The object of this research is to use automated data analysis tools to gather and analyze USGS streamflow and well records.  The Mann-Kendall test is commonly used to observe trends in data.
